# Hands-on Docker-01 : Docker Container Basic Operations

Purpose of the this hands-on training is to give students the knowledge of basic operation on Docker containers.

## Learning Outcomes

At the end of the this hands-on training, students will be able to;

- list the help about the Docker commands.

- list the running and stopped Docker containers.

- understand the properties of Docker containers.

- start, stop, and remove Docker containers.
  
- running interactive mode 

## Basic Container Commands of Docker

- If you use AWS EC2 then;
  - Check whether the docker sernanoce is up and running by using the following command.

```bash
  sudo systemctl status docker
```

- Run either `docker` or `docker help` to see the help docs about docker commands.

```bash
docker help | less
```

- Run `docker COMMAND --help` to see more information about specific command.

```bash
docker run --help | less
```



- Run `hello-world` as a first image and container. To pull and run hello-world official image, use the following command.

```bash
docker run hello-world
```

- Show the list of all containers available on Docker machine and understand container properties.
- To see the `running containers`;  

```bash
docker ps
```

- To see the `running and exited/stopped containers`;  

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- Download and run `ubuntu` container.

```bash
sudo docker run ubuntu
```

- Display the os name on the container for the current user.

```bash
uname -a
```

- Display the shell name on the container for the current user.

```bash
echo $0
```


- Run the second `ubuntu` os with interactive shell open and name container as `backend` and show that this `ubuntu` container is different from the previous one.

```bash
sudo docker run -i -t --name backend ubuntu
```

- Exit the `ubuntu` container and return to user shell.

```bash
exit # to stop the process
```

- Show the list of all containers again and understand the second `ubuntu` containers' properties and how the names of containers are given.

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- Connect to the interactive shell of running `ubuntuiki` container and `exit` afterwards.

```bash
docker start backend && docker attach backend
exit
```

- Show that `backend` container has stopped by listing all containers.

```bash
docker ps -a
```

- Show that we can get more information about `backend` container by using `docker inspect` command and see the properties.

```bash
docker inspect backend | less
# Cikmak icin q veya crtl c'ya basin
```

- Delete the first container using its `ID`.

```bash
docker stop ContainerID && rm ContainerID
```

- Delete the second container using its name.

```bash
docker rm backend
```

- Or you can use `prune` command as well

```bash
docker container prune
```

- Show that both of containers are not listed anymore.

```bash
docker ps -a
```